libs/runloop/Readme.md, before:

# Proposed replacement executors and core runloops

## Features (i/o executor `monad_async`):

1. 100% C throughout, easing FFI into Rust and other languages.
2. 100% priority based, with three levels of individual priority for
CPU and I/O.
3. 100% deterministic in the hot path so long as new work is launched
from the same thread as the executor: no thread synchronisation, no malloc,
no unbounded loops. 100% wait free, unless waits are requested or work
is posted from foreign kernel threads.
4. Tasks can be launched on executors running on non-local kernel threads,
thus making implementing a priority-based kernel thread pool very
straightforward.
5. Tasks have runtime pluggable context switching implementations, which
allows zero overhead support for C++ or Rust coroutines.
6. Integrated ultra-lightweight CPU timestamp counter based time tracking
throughout.
7. Async file i/o: open, close, read, write, sync range, durable sync.
8. Async socket i/o: open, close, read, write, bind, listen, transfer
to i/o uring, connect, shutdown.
    - io_uring kernel allocated i/o buffers for reads are supported.
9. Auto loading custom `libthread_db.so.1` for a suitable fork of GDB
which shows all running contexts as threads in GDB. A suitable fork
of GDB can be downloaded from:

https://github.com/monad-crypto/binutils-gdb/releases/download/20240930/gdb.gz


## Examples of use:

### Execute a task on an i/o executor
```c
monad_c_result r;

// Create an executor
monad_async_executor ex;
struct monad_async_executor_attr ex_attr;
memset(&ex_attr, 0, sizeof(ex_attr));
ex_attr.io_uring_ring.entries = 64;
r = monad_async_executor_create(&ex, &ex_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create a context switcher
// Each task can have its own context switcher, and the executor
// will suspend and resume that task with its context switcher
// You can have as many context switcher types per executor as
// you like. This is a setjmp/longjmp context switcher. There
// can be many others.
monad_context_switcher switcher_sjlj;
r = monad_context_switcher_sjlj_create(&switcher_sjlj);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create a task. Creating these is expensive, but they can be
// reused very efficiently when they complete their assigned work.
monad_async_task task;
struct monad_async_task_attr t_attr;
memset(&t_attr, 0, sizeof(t_attr));
r = monad_async_task_create(&task, switcher_sjlj, &t_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Set what work this task will do and its priority
task->priority.cpu = monad_async_priority_high;
task->derived.user_code = myfunc;
task->derived.user_ptr = myptr;

// From now on cheap and deterministic in the hot path

// Schedule this task for execution. This is threadsafe, which
// lets you easily build thread pools of high performance executors
r = monad_async_task_attach(ex, task, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

...

// Executor run loop
r = monad_async_executor_run(ex,
  1,       // max items to complete this run
  nullptr  // optional struct timespec timeout, can be {0, 0}
);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
// r.value is the number of items of work done, ETIME if it timed
// out and no work was done.

...

// Back to expensive operations. In C++ these can be easily wrapped
// into unique_ptrs (c.f. cpp_helpers.hpp)
r = monad_async_task_destroy(task);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
r = monad_context_switcher_destroy(switcher_sjlj);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
r = monad_async_executor_destroy(ex);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
```

### Task

The task object can be reused for different work after the work
completes.

```c
static monad_c_result myfunc(monad_async_task task)
{
  /* do stuff */

  // Suspend and resume after one second
  r = monad_async_task_suspend_for_duration(nullptr, task, 1000000000ULL);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // You could also read from a socket, write to a file, do any
  // other operation which io_uring supports. They all appear as
  // suspend and resume. If the context switcher for this task
  // were a C++ coroutine switcher, this function could be a C++
  // coroutine and it would work seamlessly and with no loss of
  // efficiency.

  // All done, return success
  return monad_c_make_success(0);
}
```

### Work dispatching to a thread pool

Work dispatcher is simple but fast -- any executor which finds itself with
no work to do dequeues a new piece of work from the work dispatcher queue.

```c
monad_c_result r;
monad_async_task tasks[1024];  // tasks

// Create a work dispatcher
monad_async_work_dispatcher wd;
struct monad_async_work_dispatcher_attr wd_attr;
memset(&wd_attr, 0, sizeof(wd_attr));
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_create(&wd, &wd_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create executors on thread to execute work
// (see below)
create_executors_on_threads(wd);

// Submit tasks to be executed. Each task's CPU priority will
// determine which get executed first.
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_submit(wd, tasks, 1024);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Wait until all tasks have been dispatched and executed
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_wait(wd, 0, 0, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Tell all executors to quit
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_quit(wd, MAX_SIZE_T, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Cleanup
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_destroy(wd);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
```

An executor thread would look like:

```c
void worker_thread(monad_async_work_dispatcher wd)
{
  monad_c_result r;

  struct monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_attr ex_attr;
  memset(&ex_attr, 0, sizeof(ex_attr));
  // Don't create an io_uring for this executor
  // This makes it into a pure-compute executor incapable of doing i/o
  ex_attr.executor.io_uring_ring.entries = 0;
  r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_create(&ex, wd, &ex_attr);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Loop executing work until told to quit
  for(;;)
  {
    r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_run(ex);
    CHECK_RESULT(r);
    if(r.value < 0)
    {
      break;
    }
  }

  // Cleanup
  r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_destroy(ex);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);
}
```

### File i/o

From a task's perspective, file i/o is implemented in the same way as how the
NT kernel's alertable i/o is implemented, which to my best knowledge is the
optimal way. There is a queue of initiated i/o and another queue of completed
i/o. When your task suspends, i/o can move from the initiated queue to the
completed queue. When your task resumes, it is on you to dequeue any completed
i/o.

As with the NT kernel's `IOSTATUS` structure which uniquely identifies each
i/o in flight, the `monad_async_io_status` structure does the same. You supply
the `monad_async_io_status` structure instance for every i/o you initiate. It
will get asynchronously completed with the result of the i/o.

Registered buffer i/o is supported. For writes, you claim a registered buffer,
write into it and initiate the write. For reads, io_uring allocates the
registered buffer, and tells you the buffer on read completion.

```c
static monad_c_result mytask(monad_async_task task)
{
  monad_c_result r;

  // Open a file for read. This will suspend the task and resume
  // it after the file has been opened.
  struct open_how how = {
      .flags = O_RDONLY, .mode = 0, .resolve = 0
  };
  monad_async_file fh;
  r = monad_async_task_file_create(&fh, task, nullptr, "foo.txt", &how);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Initiate a read. It may suspend and resume the task if there
  // are no more io_uring sqes available.
  monad_async_io_status iostatus;
  monad_async_executor_registered_io_buffer buffer;
  memset(&iostatus, 0, sizeof(iostatus));
  monad_async_task_file_read(
      &iostatus,     // i/o status to use
      task,          // this task
      fh.get(),      // open file to use
      &buffer,       // registered buffer chosen
      128,           // max bytes to read
      0,             // offset to use
      0);            // preadv2 flags to use

  // Reap i/o completions, suspending the task until more completions
  // appear
  for(;;){
    monad_async_io_status *completed;
    r = monad_async_task_suspend_until_completed_io(&completed, task, (uint64_t)-1);
    CHECK_RESULT(r);
    if(r.value == 0) {
      break;
    }
    /* handle completed ... */
  }

  // Release the registered buffer
  r = monad_async_executor_release_registered_io_buffer(
                          task->current_executor, buffer.index);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Close the file, This will suspend the task and resume it
  // after the file has been closed.
  r = monad_async_task_file_destroy(task, fh);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // All done, return success
  return monad_c_make_success(0);
}

```

## Todo

- Need to test cancellation works at every possible lifecycle and suspend state
a task can have.
    - Also need to test cancellation of individual i/o, which isn't the same as
cancelling a task (which causes all new i/o initiation to cancel).
- Operations to have a portion of a memory map asynchronously paged in, and paged
out, would be useful:
    - `IORING_OP_MADVISE`:
        - `MADV_REMOVE` punches a hole in the backing file.
        - `MADV_FREE` throws away contents of any dirty pages (lazy).
        - `MADV_COLD` page these out before other pages.
        - `MADV_PAGEOUT` page these out immediately                  <===== THIS ONE
        - `MADV_POPULATE_READ` page these in for read immediately    <===== THIS ONE
        - `MADV_POPULATE_WRITE` page these in for write immediately  <===== THIS ONE
- `AsyncIO` wrapper doesn't currently handle `EAGAIN`. _Probably_ doesn't matter as
99% of that should be handled internally by the new runloop. But not ALL of it is
handled, some is passed on.
- Multiple context switcher types at the same time should work, but is completely untested
and ought to become tested. Including with perf impact (as they usually have to
thunk when switching between disparate contexts)
- A context switcher implementing C++ coroutines would be nice. Some notes
on that:
    - MSVC coroutine frame: Promise | Frame prefix | Local variables. Coroutine
frame is: `struct msvc_frame_prefix { void(*factivate)(void*); uint16_t index, flag; };`.
Implementation is a state machine based on switching `index`.
    - GCC/clang coroutine frame: Frame prefix | Promise | Unknown | Local
variables. Coroutine frame is: `struct clang_frame_prefix { void(*factivate)(void*); void(*fdestroy)(void*);};`.
- When a task exits, all i/o still occurring on that task ought to be pumped and dumped out
(right now it aborts the process instead)

Commit message:

Fixes for cancellation of socket i/o.
Adds a new test of cancellation of socket i/o. This found lots of
bugs throughout the new runloop all of which are now fixed.

Now that socket i/o cancellation is fully debugged, this clears the
way for a Rust tokio emulation based on this library.

libs/runloop/Readme.md, after:

# Proposed replacement executors and core runloops

## Features (i/o executor `monad_async`):

1. 100% C throughout, easing FFI into Rust and other languages.
2. 100% priority based, with three levels of individual priority for
CPU and I/O.
3. 100% deterministic in the hot path so long as new work is launched
from the same thread as the executor: no thread synchronisation, no malloc,
no unbounded loops. 100% wait free, unless waits are requested or work
is posted from foreign kernel threads.
4. Tasks can be launched on executors running on non-local kernel threads,
thus making implementing a priority-based kernel thread pool very
straightforward.
5. Tasks have runtime pluggable context switching implementations, which
allows zero overhead support for C++ or Rust coroutines.
6. Integrated ultra-lightweight CPU timestamp counter based time tracking
throughout.
7. Async file i/o: open, close, read, write, sync range, durable sync.
8. Async socket i/o: open, close, read, write, bind, listen, transfer
to i/o uring, connect, shutdown.
    - io_uring kernel allocated i/o buffers for reads are supported.
9. Auto loading custom `libthread_db.so.1` for a suitable fork of GDB
which shows all running contexts as threads in GDB. A suitable fork
of GDB can be downloaded from:

https://github.com/monad-crypto/binutils-gdb/releases/download/20240930/gdb.gz


## Examples of use:

### Execute a task on an i/o executor
```c
monad_c_result r;

// Create an executor
monad_async_executor ex;
struct monad_async_executor_attr ex_attr;
memset(&ex_attr, 0, sizeof(ex_attr));
ex_attr.io_uring_ring.entries = 64;
r = monad_async_executor_create(&ex, &ex_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create a context switcher
// Each task can have its own context switcher, and the executor
// will suspend and resume that task with its context switcher
// You can have as many context switcher types per executor as
// you like. This is a setjmp/longjmp context switcher. There
// can be many others.
monad_context_switcher switcher_sjlj;
r = monad_context_switcher_sjlj_create(&switcher_sjlj);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create a task. Creating these is expensive, but they can be
// reused very efficiently when they complete their assigned work.
monad_async_task task;
struct monad_async_task_attr t_attr;
memset(&t_attr, 0, sizeof(t_attr));
r = monad_async_task_create(&task, switcher_sjlj, &t_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Set what work this task will do and its priority
task->priority.cpu = monad_async_priority_high;
task->derived.user_code = myfunc;
task->derived.user_ptr = myptr;

// From now on cheap and deterministic in the hot path

// Schedule this task for execution. This is threadsafe, which
// lets you easily build thread pools of high performance executors
r = monad_async_task_attach(ex, task, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

...

// Executor run loop
r = monad_async_executor_run(ex,
  1,       // max items to complete this run
  nullptr  // optional struct timespec timeout, can be {0, 0}
);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
// r.value is the number of items of work done, ETIME if it timed
// out and no work was done.

...

// Back to expensive operations. In C++ these can be easily wrapped
// into unique_ptrs (c.f. cpp_helpers.hpp)
r = monad_async_task_destroy(task);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
r = monad_context_switcher_destroy(switcher_sjlj);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
r = monad_async_executor_destroy(ex);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
```

### Task

The task object can be reused for different work after the work
completes.

```c
static monad_c_result myfunc(monad_async_task task)
{
  /* do stuff */

  // Suspend and resume after one second
  r = monad_async_task_suspend_for_duration(nullptr, task, 1000000000ULL);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // You could also read from a socket, write to a file, do any
  // other operation which io_uring supports. They all appear as
  // suspend and resume. If the context switcher for this task
  // were a C++ coroutine switcher, this function could be a C++
  // coroutine and it would work seamlessly and with no loss of
  // efficiency.

  // All done, return success
  return monad_c_make_success(0);
}
```

### Work dispatching to a thread pool

Work dispatcher is simple but fast -- any executor which finds itself with
no work to do dequeues a new piece of work from the work dispatcher queue.

```c
monad_c_result r;
monad_async_task tasks[1024];  // tasks

// Create a work dispatcher
monad_async_work_dispatcher wd;
struct monad_async_work_dispatcher_attr wd_attr;
memset(&wd_attr, 0, sizeof(wd_attr));
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_create(&wd, &wd_attr);  // expensive
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Create executors on thread to execute work
// (see below)
create_executors_on_threads(wd);

// Submit tasks to be executed. Each task's CPU priority will
// determine which get executed first.
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_submit(wd, tasks, 1024);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Wait until all tasks have been dispatched and executed
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_wait(wd, 0, 0, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Tell all executors to quit
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_quit(wd, MAX_SIZE_T, nullptr);
CHECK_RESULT(r);

// Cleanup
r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_destroy(wd);
CHECK_RESULT(r);
```

An executor thread would look like:

```c
void worker_thread(monad_async_work_dispatcher wd)
{
  monad_c_result r;

  struct monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_attr ex_attr;
  memset(&ex_attr, 0, sizeof(ex_attr));
  // Don't create an io_uring for this executor
  // This makes it into a pure-compute executor incapable of doing i/o
  ex_attr.executor.io_uring_ring.entries = 0;
  r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_create(&ex, wd, &ex_attr);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Loop executing work until told to quit
  for(;;)
  {
    r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_run(ex);
    CHECK_RESULT(r);
    if(r.value < 0)
    {
      break;
    }
  }

  // Cleanup
  r = monad_async_work_dispatcher_executor_destroy(ex);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);
}
```

### File i/o

From a task's perspective, file i/o is implemented in the same way as how the
NT kernel's alertable i/o is implemented, which to my best knowledge is the
optimal way. There is a queue of initiated i/o and another queue of completed
i/o. When your task suspends, i/o can move from the initiated queue to the
completed queue. When your task resumes, it is on you to dequeue any completed
i/o.

As with the NT kernel's `IOSTATUS` structure which uniquely identifies each
i/o in flight, the `monad_async_io_status` structure does the same. You supply
the `monad_async_io_status` structure instance for every i/o you initiate. It
will get asynchronously completed with the result of the i/o.

Registered buffer i/o is supported. For writes, you claim a registered buffer,
write into it and initiate the write. For reads, io_uring allocates the
registered buffer, and tells you the buffer on read completion.

```c
static monad_c_result mytask(monad_async_task task)
{
  monad_c_result r;

  // Open a file for read. This will suspend the task and resume
  // it after the file has been opened.
  struct open_how how = {
      .flags = O_RDONLY, .mode = 0, .resolve = 0
  };
  monad_async_file fh;
  r = monad_async_task_file_create(&fh, task, nullptr, "foo.txt", &how);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Initiate a read. It may suspend and resume the task if there
  // are no more io_uring sqes available.
  monad_async_io_status iostatus;
  monad_async_executor_registered_io_buffer buffer;
  memset(&iostatus, 0, sizeof(iostatus));
  monad_async_task_file_read(
      &iostatus,     // i/o status to use
      task,          // this task
      fh.get(),      // open file to use
      &buffer,       // registered buffer chosen
      128,           // max bytes to read
      0,             // offset to use
      0);            // preadv2 flags to use

  // Reap i/o completions, suspending the task until more completions
  // appear
  for(;;){
    monad_async_io_status *completed;
    r = monad_async_task_suspend_until_completed_io(&completed, task, (uint64_t)-1);
    CHECK_RESULT(r);
    if(r.value == 0) {
      break;
    }
    /* handle completed ... */
  }

  // Release the registered buffer
  r = monad_async_executor_release_registered_io_buffer(
                          task->current_executor, buffer.index);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // Close the file, This will suspend the task and resume it
  // after the file has been closed.
  r = monad_async_task_file_destroy(task, fh);
  CHECK_RESULT(r);

  // All done, return success
  return monad_c_make_success(0);
}

```

## Todo

- Integrated socket i/o timeout would be real nice to have. io_uring timeouts
need a second SQE as well as being quite slow, and we don't currently have the
ability to fetch two consecutive SQEs without possibility of them getting split.
Perhaps investigate `SO_SNDTIMEO` and `SO_RCVTIMEO` which are actually somewhat
useful on Linux?
- Need to test cancellation works at every possible lifecycle and suspend state
a task can have.
    - Also need to test cancellation of individual i/o, which isn't the same as
cancelling a task (which causes all new i/o initiation to cancel).
- Operations to have a portion of a memory map asynchronously paged in, and paged
out, would be useful:
    - `IORING_OP_MADVISE`:
        - `MADV_REMOVE` punches a hole in the backing file.
        - `MADV_FREE` throws away contents of any dirty pages (lazy).
        - `MADV_COLD` page these out before other pages.
        - `MADV_PAGEOUT` page these out immediately                  <===== THIS ONE
        - `MADV_POPULATE_READ` page these in for read immediately    <===== THIS ONE
        - `MADV_POPULATE_WRITE` page these in for write immediately  <===== THIS ONE
- `AsyncIO` wrapper doesn't currently handle `EAGAIN`. _Probably_ doesn't matter as
99% of that should be handled internally by the new runloop. But not ALL of it is
handled, some is passed on.
- Multiple context switcher types at the same time should work, but is completely untested
and ought to become tested. Including with perf impact (as they usually have to
thunk when switching between disparate contexts)
- A context switcher implementing C++ coroutines would be nice. Some notes
on that:
    - MSVC coroutine frame: Promise | Frame prefix | Local variables. Coroutine
frame is: `struct msvc_frame_prefix { void(*factivate)(void*); uint16_t index, flag; };`.
Implementation is a state machine based on switching `index`.
    - GCC/clang coroutine frame: Frame prefix | Promise | Unknown | Local
variables. Coroutine frame is: `struct clang_frame_prefix { void(*factivate)(void*); void(*fdestroy)(void*);};`.
- When a task exits, all i/o still occurring on that task ought to be pumped and dumped out
(right now it aborts the process instead)
